 Well, welcome to our gathering, but I have a question. How many of you here believe that the Bible is the Word of God? Can I see a show of hands? Well, praise God, that's great, but why? Why do you believe it's the Word of God? You and I, glibly cling to that. In fact, we're gambling our eternity on that. But it's interesting not everybody believes that, and you're going to need to know why you believe that, because I think dark times are coming. So an interesting article that was handed to me yesterday, the headline says, the Catholic Church no longer swears by truth of the Bible. The hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church is published a teaching document instructing the faithful that some parts of the Bible are not actually true. The Catholic bishops of England, Wales, and Scotland are warning their five million worshipers, as well as many others, go on to the study of Scripture, that they should not expect a total accuracy from the Bible, and that goes on and on to indicate that some of it's not really true. It's very useful, but not accurate, and on it goes. Very typical of many denominational statements, and the Catholic Church, of course, doesn't surprise us on the one hand, and yet this joins the key issue. Is the Bible really true? And that's what we're going to take a look at. How did we get the Bible? And what is it really? Where did the texts of the Bible come from? How did the so-called canon, that is the authoritative version, get defined? Are the manuscripts reliable? And how accurate are translations? Which version is best? And that sort of thing. How do we really know that the Bible is the Word of God? That's what we're going to deal with. You and I live in a time of authority crises. There's parental authority being challenged in our homes, marital authority being challenged in the courts and elsewhere, political authority everywhere, being challenged, academic authority, ecclesiastical authority. All these things derive, of course, from a basic concept of truth. It's interesting to notice that if we take any of over 80 indicators, social indicators, most of them were improving up until about 1963 and then they started to deteriorate rapidly. Devorce rates escalated. Families broke up. The acceptance of homosexuality became commonplace. The advent of teenage pregnancies, the murder of inconvenient babies and crime rates. All these dramatically change in 1963 and following. Why? What happened that year? That's when we outlawed the Bible in our schools and in our culture. You know, there are actually only two world views that one can hold. One world view says everything that we experience is simply the result of some kind of cosmic accident. The other view is that what we experience is the deliberate result of a creator. There's really only two views, variations of each of these, of course. We all get confronted with four basic questions. Who am I? Where did I come from? Where am I going? And to whom am I accountable? And depending on your world view that will lead to your response to those four questions. See the rejection of authority actually had its roots in Genesis chapter 3, right at the very beginning. This three opens up. Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And he said to the woman, Yay, half God said, you shall not eat of every tree of the garden. The first introduction of Satan here in this narrative. The first thing he does is raise a question about the Word of God. Yay, half God said, the next step of course is straight denial. You shall not surely die and so forth. Only through the accountability to the creator God, who fashioned human beings for moral obedience and high spiritual destiny, do we experience the results of human dignity and true freedom? Anything other than that leads to anarchy. Most of us have probably heard that the skeptical theories about the Bible, most of these have collapsed if you do your homework. The fact that the patriarchal accounts in the Bible are actually historical, has been doubted by many, but has been corroborated by archaeological and other evidences. Many said there was no, it wasn't even writing in Moses' day and that's been proven to be false. The fact that the gospels and the epistles were written in the second century. In other words, over a hundred years after the fact. And all of these have been shredded and refuted by archaeological discoveries, documentary discoveries, and competent analysis of what we have. So these common skeptical assertions are invalid to anyone that's going to be diligent and do their homework. The scripture says, 2 Timothy 3 16, that's easy to remember because of the 3 16. 2 Timothy 3 16, all scripture is given by inspiration of God in this profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction and righteousness. Very familiar verse. All scripture, all scripture, not just certain parts that you might select. If you try to believe those parts of the Bible that you accept and reject the others, then it's you, you're believing in yourself rather than in the scripture. All scripture is given by the inspiration of God. Now that word inspiration there actually is in the Greek is God breathed that it's not just influenced by, it's actually God breathed that these are words that God chose and selected. Are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, and for correction? reproof would be for wrong conduct and correction for wrong doctrine. And as we study the epistles of Paul, for an example, we discover that Romans is a the doctrinal statement on sateriology or salvation, and first Corinthians, the reproof of that and Galatians the correction of that. Book of Ephesians presents the doctrine of ecclesiology, the background of what is this mystical thing we call the church, and Philippians and Colossians the reproof and correction for that. And first and second the second Thessalonians present the doctrine of eschatology, study the last things. We discover the more we study the Bible, the more we discover that it's very well organized, specifically for its purposes. And now we have the whole package hangs together. One of the things we should understand that even Peter includes Paul's writings when he speaks of scriptures. And second Peter 3, the first 16 verses, it's clear that Peter is regarding Paul's writing on the same equivalence as the collection of the tonoch that they had in the Greek called the Septuagint version of what we call the Old Testament, that they recognized that Paul's writings were other scriptures. Paul in fact cites Luke alongside Deuteronomy, puts them together as scripture in 1 Timothy 5 and elsewhere. The scripture itself declares its divine origin and integrity all through the scripture, and I'll leave these notes, the passages for your notes to look up when you get a chance, you'll discover the scripture itself declares its integrity, that it's all divine origin, and Jesus, by the way, pre-approved this through the Holy Spirit in the Upper Room Discourse in John 14 verse 26. So one of the things you'll discover very quickly that if you buy any of it, it all ties together. There's no excuse to buy part of it, not the others, because you're causing it to deny itself. If you want to reject the whole thing, then reject the whole thing. But if you're going to accept the thing, you accept the total package, because it's has integrity. That's what we mean by that very term. Now how did this actually come about? Men were specifically chosen and prepared for their preparation of these documents. Jeremiah speaks of that, Paul alludes to that in Galatians. They wrote exactly what God wanted for His communication with people and through them to the world. We now discover, as we examine the text more carefully, that there are all kinds of messages in the text that disappear if you change one letter. You begin to realize that the Torah, the books of Moses, apparently were given to Moses letter by letter in effect, whether he realized it or not. And I'll show you some examples of that before we're through, that we have here an integral package and that God superintendent watched over every detail. Now subsequent human transmission is of course subject to errors and losses. When man gets in the act that messes things up, and indeed when we speak of its precision and its accuracy, we're talking about the originals. As it gets translated and communicated, indeed there are errors introduced. And that's what we have to be very sensitive to. Now the New Testament is in the Old Testament concealed. The Old Testament and New Testament revealed. In other words, it's one book. It has an integrated design. And once you discover that for yourself, it'll change your entire perspective on every passage in the Bible. One of the things we find all through the Scripture are what would be called in the computer field, a macro code, anticipatory macro codes. They demonstrate an origin of this message from outside the time domain. History is detailed in advance. We'll discover again and again and again, there is an element introduced early that makes no sense except in the context of an event that occurred a thousand years later. In other words, the planting of that idea or concept came from someone who knew what was going to happen well in advance. And an example will encounter many of those as we go through our study, but just to give you one example, when Moses is told to raise a brazen serpent in the wilderness, numbers 21, they had some serpents that were killing people. He went to the Lord, Lord, says, a raise a brass serpent on a pole on a hill. Everyone looks to it. We'll be spared. And he did and they were. Now you can read the entire Old Testament and that makes no sense. Why would God use a brass serpent of all things on a hill? And brass, of course, Levitically is a medal for judgment, but the serpent is a symbol of sin. It looks to the sin on the pole. It's going to get healed. That doesn't make sense. You look, go through the Old Testament. You'll find no illusion, no explanation. In fact, many centuries later, that brass serpent still around, they're worshipping it. The king has to take it. King has the guy has to take it and destroy it because it was becoming an idol. What's going on here? It will make no sense until you get to John chapter 3 in the New Testament where Jesus Himself explains the Nicodemus that it was in effect a symbol anticipating the cross of Christ. As Moses raised the serpent in the wilderness, so shall the Son of Man be raised up. And suddenly the fog lifts, suddenly he realized that it was a messianic anticipation of Jesus Christ and so on. We find dozens of those laced all through the Scripture. And as you discover that, you begin to realize you have an integrated design. You're going to reject it, reject it, but don't reject it, accept or reject parts of it. It's a package that hangs together. The inspired canon. The word canon is obviously nothing to do with military stuff. But it has to do from the Greek word canon, which means a rule or a standard of measurement. And that's when they speak of the canon, the words that are God breathed. There are many useful books of those early centuries that scholars study, but they're not God breathed. That doesn't mean they're not valued for lexicon or understanding what people may have believed in those days. But they're not inspired by God. The canon are those that were evidenced by the early church as in a very special sense. This all began with the Torah. The five books of Moses were placed in the Ark of the Covenant, along with the Ten Commandments. That was the first beginning of the veneration of the narrative, the text and so forth. And the whole idea of the canon is based on two convictions. But the words of the scripture are God's own words. And secondly, that man simply transmitted what he received. So man may have influenced the form, but not the content. The content was God's. That's the distinction. God's own words. The Old Testament presents it as God's actual speech. In 1 Kings 22 and EMI 8 and the Psalm several places in Jeremiah. Clearly the intent is the representation as these were literally God's own words to whom he was speaking. And of course, the Old Testament specifies and details the Messiah, centuries in advance. The Old Testament is the story of a nation that was brought forth to present the Messiah and the New Testament is the story of that man. And the man is validated by all the details that were anticipated hundreds of years before he was born. Once you establish that who Christ is, he then in turn authenticates the whole package. Christ fulfills the specifications beyond competent dispute. And he then authenticates the Old Testament scriptures having established his identity. And so that's our epistemological approach. The first thing you need to do for yourself is to establish the integrity of the design, not because I told you or anyone else told you, find out for yourself, discover that the 66 books, even though penned by 40 different guys over several thousand years, are an integrated message every details there by deliberate design. And once you discover that, then out of that comes the identity of a person. The identity of Jesus Christ. We know who Jesus Christ was by his fulfilling those specifications. While Gibson's movie, the passion was an excellent portrayal in many respects, a remarkable piece of work on the one hand. On the other hand, it doesn't really communicate who Jesus Christ was. And in fact, the other thing to understand is that the crucifix of Christ was not a tragedy. It was an achievement. He had, that's been planned before the foundation of the world. And he faithfully went through that process, that program, where you're a benefit in mind. And we need to understand it was achievement, not a tragedy at all. And so once you establish the identity of Jesus Christ, he of course, authenticates the scripture. The first thing he does after his resurrection is give a couple of guys a seven mile Bible study, starting from Moses going through all the way to the Psalms and the rest, pointing out that every word there is references himself. So that's our epistemological approach. Pestemology being the study of knowledge at scope at limits. How do we know anything? Well this is the way we're going to deal with this issue. By one cataloging, Dave Barton Pains, in fact, to be a biblical prophecy, he catalogs over 8,000 predictive verses, verses that forecast the future. On 1,800 different predictions, on over 700 different matters. This is just one catalog, but the point is the Bible is prophetic. It's not just a quaint collection of tribal history, and over the centuries, it is far more than that. It is a supernatural and its origin, and it demonstrates its authenticity by manifesting an origin from outside the dimensionality of time altogether. You need to discover that for yourself, however. One of the exercises we do in some of our other presentations, we take just eight of 300, or over 300 prophecies of the first coming. We take eight of those, the fact that he was born in Bethlehem, the fact that he would present himself as King, writing a donkey, the fact that he was betrayed for 30 pieces of silver, the fact that that transaction recur and the temple and the money would end up finally in the potter's hands. All of this was predicted centuries before, that he had wounds in his hands, that he would make no defense, even though he's innocent, that he would die with a wicked yet be buried with the rich, and that he would be crucified. These are just eight prophecies, and by analyzing the circumstances around each one, we come up with an operatory probability of each one being individual, the probability that a single person would fill all eight turns out to be an enormous number. In fact, that exercise, applying covenant or probabilities, is actually staggering and encouraging to check it out. The main point is that this establishes his identity, probably more with more certainty than any other identity on the face of the earth. I'm more certain that Jesus Christ was the Messiah of Israel than I am of my own name, and I can demonstrate that mathematically, but let's us for this purpose keep going on here. The most, and those eight prophecies are the easy ones. It skipped some of the most amazing ones. The fact that the Old Testament lays out in great detail in Genesis 22 and Psalm 22, when Isaiah 53, are narratives that are just astonishing in their precision. Psalm 22 reads as if it was dictated, first person singular while he hung on the cross. It opens and closes with his first and last statements, and it describes what he sees as he hangs on the cross. He's written several hundred years before the fact. Isaiah 53 describes the purpose of the cross, and it's achievement with more detailed and all of Paul's epistles put together and on it goes. He has his genealogy laid out in advance, and the precise day that he would present himself as a King Jerusalem was laid out in advance with such precision that Jesus held him accountable to know that day. Their failure to recognize that day is the reason according to Jesus who remarked and looked 19 that Jerusalem was destroyed in 70 AD. So the precision and the accountability is all there clearly laid out in the Scripture. What's man's role in all this? From the standpoint of form, the human writers contribute to much to the making of Scripture. The historical research, the illogical meditation, linguistic style, etc. There are figures of speech that were unique to those people. There are over 200 different times of rhetorical devices, figures of speech that are used in the Scripture. So man's role, the majesty of Isaiah's one thing, the pragmatic pastoral rhetoric of Amos being another and so forth. The personalities of the writers show up in the form, but not the content. That's an important distinction. Theologically, from the standpoint of content, the Bible regards the human writers of having contributed nothing. The content is God's direction. That's what we mean by God's breath. And these are things that you need to explore and determine for yourself, but these make the Bible distinctive. In fact, as we begin to understand more carefully the Bible from an information science point of view, we discover that the integrity of that design of the total package manifests a strategy to avoid hostile jamming. It's interesting that you can't, where's the chapter in the Bible on baptism? Where's the chapter on salvation? Take some subject, some critical subject. Where's the chapter on that? You'll discover it's not one chapter. If you're a communications engineer and you're designing a message system anticipating hostile jamming by an adversary, one of the things you do is you take your message and spread it across the available bandwidth. That's exactly what the Bible has done. That's what Isaiah mentions in Isaiah 28. Now, if I established my truth, line up online, precepts are on a upon precept, here a little there a little. It's deliberately spread that way because you can tear any page out of the Bible and not lose any of the doctrines. It may lose clarity on some issue, but the whole design has been designed and it's been designed in anticipation of jamming. It's extremely, if the more you know about communications engineering, the more fascinating that all is. Some of you know, I've written a book called Cosmic Codes, Hidden Messages from the Edge of Eternity, which attempts to look at these things from the point of view of an information technologist, from cryptography and so forth. And so, I commend that for those that you might have to interest that. But one of the critical aspects in examining your Bible is its authentication. There are many scholars that claim that Moses didn't really write the books of Moses. They were really written by somebody else, some other scribes and so forth and just attributed to Moses. And you run into those theories and undermine your confidence, except the point is Jesus attributes the Torah to Moses. So if Jesus is who he claims to be, then that's authenticated by the highest authentication possible. And anyone that believes in Jesus Christ has no problem in the authorship of the Pentateuch or the Torah. Now, if you don't believe in Jesus Christ, you've got bigger problems than the authentication of the books of Moses. But clearly, Jesus himself authenticates Moses. The Torah is quoted 165 times directly in the New Testament with over 200 delusions. So the point is each one validates the other, if you will. And Jesus on the Emmaus Road, one of his first acts after his resurrection, is to give a seven mile Bible study to two guys in which he demonstrates that Jesus Christ was presented in the Scriptures. Because speaking in the third person, did you know that Jesus was to do this and to this and this and so forth? And very, very interesting event. He said, beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself, not just here and there, all the Scriptures. And one of the discoveries you need to make for yourself is that Jesus Christ is on every page of the Old Testament. Some very clearly, some very indirectly, but always there. All the Scriptures he says, do you have said, think not that I come to destroy the Torah or the law or the prophets, I come not to destroy but to fulfill. For very I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one yot are one tittle shall and no wise pass from the law till all be fulfilled. Yot and a tittle are Hebrew expressions. Yot is one of the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet that you and I would mistake for an apostrophe. It's just a little mark, almost like a blemish on the paper. A tittle is the little tiny decorative hook on certain of the letters. And this is equivalent to you or me saying one tittle is the same as saying not the dotting of the eye or the crossing of the tea will pass. This is a call to literalists. Jesus clearly indicated that we should be taking it very, very, very, very strictly. Now there's a couple of terms you get bandied about inerrancy and infallibility. What do we mean by inerrancy? That the Bible contains neither errors of fact, that is material errors or internal contradictions. Those, they're called material errors or formal errors in the documentation field. The point is we're talking here the originals, what they call the autographs. It contains neither errors of fact nor internal contradictions. Infallibility is the subjective consequence of design and inspiration. That is, it's reliable and trustworthy to all who turn in search for truth. So those are two terms that are well only find. However, it is subject to imperfect transmission. Inerrancy is attributed only to the original autographs. Recognize is the potential imperfections inherent in their transmission, copying, translations, and so forth. And also the potential cultural, historical, and rhetorical gaps between the writer and the reader. And there are gaps that can be overcome by diligent scholarship. But the important thing is less than 1% of the scriptures are under competent dispute. Unfortunately, no doctrine of the scriptures depends on any of the disputed passages. There are disputed passages, there are issues that scholars ponder, but they don't impact any critical doctrine. Let's talk about some other terms. The word Bible itself is derived from the Latin, from the Greek word bibliia, which is diminutive of biblos, which notes any kind of written document, but originally one written on papyrus is what it originally meant. Of course, today the term has achieved a very high-venerated status. The word Testament, we speak of Old Testament New Testament, comes from the Latin Testament, from the Greek diaphatica, which is most of the occurrences in the Greek Bible, actually means a covenant rather than testament. The word Testament really has changed its meaning and modern. It's really a covenant. It really should be the Old Covenant New Covenant, but I'll be that as it may we'll move on. Now the Hebrew Bible, which is where we're going to primarily focus on in this session, the Torah, of course, is the Pentateuch, the first five books of Moses, the most venerated portion of the Scripture, especially to our Jewish friends. Then a section called the prophets, the Neveim, the former prophets and the latter prophets, and they would include Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings in that category, interestingly enough. And then the latter prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the book of the Twelve Prophets. The Twelve Prophets, we call the minor prophets, not because they're less important, but they're smaller in size. It's a librarians term, they're small books, but there's twelve of them, and they would call them the Book of the Twelve Prophets. And then they have the section, they call the writings, the The Psalms Proverbs Job, and five scrolls, which includes songs, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther, and also Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Chronicles. So that's the way the Hebrew Bible would be divided up. They have their books in a little different order. We take Samuel and Kings and split them into two, and Chronicles into two, but basically essentially the books just in a different order. They were familiar with what we call the Old Testament, what they would call the Tanach, the Tanach being an acronym of Torah, Neveim, and Ketuim. Okay, the Hebrew language. The scripture says, Genesis 11 verse 1, the whole earth was of one language and of one speech. And I'm among those that believe that that original language was Hebrew. A proto-hebrew perhaps, but still that it was Hebrew. The Hebrew language has some distinctives that no other language in the planet earth has. We'll talk a little bit about that. But clearly that's where it all started. One of the peculiarities of the Hebrew language is that the alphabet itself is semantic, not just phonetic. Most alphabets of most languages are phonetic. If you know the letters and how to pronounce them, you could pronounce the word. In Hebrew, if you know what the letters mean, you can make a good guess as to what the combination means, not just how it sounds. And that's rather remarkable. The Hebrew language is also self-parsing, meaning that to see the, all the early languages were written without spaces between the words. That all came later. In the Hebrew, it has five letters that have a slightly different shape if they're the last letter of a word. And because of that, it's possible to read Hebrew without knowing the spaces between the letters. Interestingly enough, so it's a very different, in some respects far more advanced language than most people realize. And the language that the alphabet is all consonants, no vowels. It's what's called a consonantal script. It's like for building you have BLDG. We do that all the time. You know, building number three or something. We'd be BLDG, you know what I'm talking about. You don't have to put all the vowels in there, or boulevard, same thing. And the vowels in effect are implied. It wasn't until the ninth century AD that the maseretes developed, what they call, developed conventions for the way, the vowels were always inferred. But as time went on, they saw the need to put cues in there as to what vowels are missing. They do that by putting little tiny marks above and below the letters that's called pointed script. And the pointing conventions were developed in the ninth century by the maseretes. But okay, now the Hebrew language is astonishingly vivid, concise, and simple on one hand, but it's so dense then it makes it difficult to translate fully. It takes sometimes a two or three times as much space to translate the Hebrew into English because the words carry so much significant on their own. And so it typically takes twice as many English letters or letters. Every Hebrew word is composed from a three letter root. And the verbs are formed from three letter roots with forms developed by a change of vowels or by adding suffixes or prefixes. They put a few letters in front or back to amend what it might mean by itself. The root consonants give Hebrew a semantic backbone and stability that's not characteristic of Western languages on the one hand. On the other hand, it also leads to wordplay. The verb usage is not characterized by precise definitions or tenses. The very context dependent. And because it is, that lends itself to wordplay or puns and that sort of thing. And so there's often far more carried in the Hebrew sentence than it would be, say, in the Greek sentence. And now the Greek language is just the opposite. It's very beautiful language, rich and harmonious. It's a very fitting tool for vigorous thought and religious devotion and also argumentation because Greek is very, very precise. And that gives it a strength and a vigor, the language of argument, a vocabulary style that could penetrate and clarify phenomenon rather than simply describing it, where Hebrew would describe it with Greek. You can reach inside and tell what's going on in a sense. And how does it do that by the precision? And I'll come to a few things there. The classic Greek, sometimes called the addict Greek or high Greek, is subtle in the syntax and very expressive in the use of participles. Sometimes it's not even possible to translate them into English and capture the full nuances of it. And so this was the culture at its zenith, was the addict Greek. The coinic Greek or common Greek was the result of Alexander the Great as he encouraged the spread of the Greek culture. All throughout the world, the regional dialects were replaced by Hellenistic or common Greek. It's simpler and less elegant than the addict Greek or the high Greek, but it nevertheless retains most of the strength and beauty of it. And that is what the New Testament is written in, is the coinic Greek. And so, give you an example, let's take a Greek verb. The Greek verb, every Greek verb meets five aspects. It has a tense, a mood, a voice, a person, and a number. And from the verb itself, you can tell it'll convey far more than just its definition would convey. It'll tell you in effect who is performing the action, whether just one or more than one is doing it. When it is done, whether it is single event or a process, whether it is an actual happening, a command, or something wish for. In other words, what we think of contrary to facts of junkitive or imperative and so forth, it obviously includes all of that. And where the verb is active or passive, we have active voice or passive in the English. The Greek also is a third, where it's both the operative. And that's what causes many people to misunderstand some of the things in the Paul's epistles, because they're not sensitive to the Greek syntax. And so a single Greek word can require a phrase or sometimes a whole sentence or even more in another language. So Greek is incredibly precise and expressive. And so Greek, and Hebrew is very, very different. Well, what did Jesus speak? Well, it's common language of Aramaic, as Mark 15 highlights. He also spoke Greek as he did in Mark 7. He spoke initially to Greek in Greek to marry in the garden that morning until he had, and she didn't recognize him until he addressed her in Aramaic and heard the sound of his voice in the Aramaic. Pilot himself, interestingly enough, personally wrote Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. He apparently knew enough Hebrew because he was in charge of that region. That was his assignment. He spoke Greek because that was the common commercial business language of that day. And he spoke Latin because of it was the official language of the Roman Empire. And as the years go by, it takes several centuries before Latin displaces the Greek throughout the Roman world. But the pilot spoke all three, interestingly enough. Now, there are many non-canonical books. There's a group called the Apocrypha. The word means hidden, by the way. And these were formulated about 300 BC to about 70 AD. There's about 13 of them that happened to be included in the Septuite translation. And they were embraced by the Council of Trenton 1546 as part of the package, but not recognized by the church as canonical. They were but they were in existence at that time. Then there's also a group of the Sudapagrapha, which are books that were false. They were written under pseudonyms. And there's 54 of these. They're very curious things, scholastically, but not taken seriously by the early church. So you'll run into the non-canonical book. These are books that were not regarded by the early church as inspired by God. They have characteristics that would exclude them from being in the canon. There are a group of books that are lost to history. They're alluded to in the scriptures. The Book of the War is the Lord is mentioned in Numbers 21. And there's a whole list of them. The Book of the Just, the Book of the Acts of Solomon and so forth. These are lost. We have no idea what they said, where they are. They're just illusions. They are lost writings. And as remain the subject of conjectures by scholars, and there are from time to time false versions of these that surface, but then are discredited for one reason or another. What we really want to focus on is the Old Testament texts, the Hebrew texts. The original Hebrew was pulled together in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah, and it was called the Vorlogah as a group. And in 285 BC, Ptolemy Philadelphia funded the translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek. In those days, Greek was the standard language of business. Most people, even if you were Jewish, spoke Greek. They used Hebrew much as a Catholic uses Latin. They used it for ceremonial purposes, but many Jewish people didn't really have facility in Hebrew, and they desired to have a copy of their scriptures in Greek. So Alexandria, Egypt was in those days, one of the major literary centers of the world, and they funded 70 scholars, some would say 72 scholars, in Alexandria, to translate the Hebrew scriptures into Greek. And some say there were six from each of 12 tribes that make 72. There's different versions of the the point of their work product was finished in 270 BC, from 285 to 2 centric 15 years. And the product that they produced is known as the Septuagint translation, Septuagint being simply a fancy word for 70. It usually shows up in abbreviation LXX, which is 70 in Roman numerals, but that's the Septuagint. And this is a very valuable document for many reasons. First of all, it gives us a precise Greek rendering of the Old Testament. It is also very prominent because the prophecies that are detailed in the Septuagint were in black and white, virtually three centuries before, Christ's ministry. So the existence of those prophecies are beyond dispute. And another reason it's so significant is that that translation became the Bible of the early church. The early Christians used the Septuagint translation along with the letters of Paul and other letters that were being circulated as their scriptures. And meanwhile, the Hebrew text, by the time you get to the ninth century, the Hebrew text was codified by the Massaretes. These were group ascribes and their product is called the Massaretic text. Your English translation of the Old Testament is a translation deriving from the Massaretic text. And it in turn really had its roots in the Council of Yomniah, which occurred about 90 AD. Obviously, the Israel rejected her Messiah, crucified him. As he predicted Jerusalem was destroyed in 70 AD, that gave Judaism a huge problem because they were taught that without the shedding of blood, there's no remission of sins and they have no way to shed blood when the temple is gone, so they've got a real problem. And they have a council to deal with this and that council really redefines Judaism into a religion of works and good works and so forth. But they also undertook a revision of their vorlogger, their Hebrew text, and gave rise to what ultimately becomes the Massaretic text, the text that we have in our Bibles. The Council of Yomniah, they were upset because the Septuagint was used by the Christians, so they rejected the Septuagint. They wanted their own Bible, if you will, and so they made their amendments and so forth. And they produced the unified text of the Tamach and they got rid of anything that didn't agree with it. They destroyed and that their Tamach becomes the Massaretic text later. And so the Massarets, these are a body of medieval scribes and tiberias that were charged with the Old Testament text preservation from about 500 AD and codified about 950 AD, so called the 10th century. And they're the ones that also invented the way of putting, representing vowels in the Hebrew. And the oldest dated manuscript is 895 AD. And it is only part of the three major sections, the Torah and the Kedavim are missing, as far as that particular manuscript's concern. The Hebrew text today is largely dependent on what's called codex, linen gradensis. And it's stored in the Linna-grad public library. And it's used as the primary text for most Hebrew texts today. And depending on which Hebrew text you have in your word process or whatever, it comes from, it'll come from the linen grad in a codex. It was copied about 2008 AD from text written by Aaron Ben Moses, Ben Asher. And we also have a thing called the Samaritan Pentateuch, the 4th century BC now. It differs from the Massarets text in about 6,000 places of which 1,000 need to be taken seriously. And where the Samaritan Pentateuch disagrees with this Septuagint, excuse me, agrees with this Septuagint against the Massaretic. It should be regarded as significant. In other words, you've got a Samaritan text that's 4th century BC. You've got the Greek translation of the Old Testament in the 3rd century BC. When those two agree and have something different than the Massaretic text has, which is in 900 AD, that's probably a result, a deliberate result of the Council of Yomnia, where they have diddled with it. And so the two oldest codexes of the Samaritan Pentateuch are in the 13th century, 12th and 13th century in England, in Manchester, England, or Cambridge, England. Now, there's an Aramaic Samaritan Targon of the early Christian times and an Arabic translation of the 11th century, they also exist. And now the Aramaic Targums, Aramaic became the official language of the Persian Empire in the 5th or 6th century BC. And so there's a number of translations. One of the most highly evaporated these is what's called the unclose translation. And it's among the rabbis highly regarded. And there are some very interesting differences of the unclose translation and your King James. An example of that is in Genesis where was the first son of Seth was the one that led the teaching against God. And it's just the opposite. King James is a mistranslation. It's well known among scholars probably footnote in your Bible. A lot of it comes from the unclose translation. And there's several others who are not to go over each one of these. The Bashieta is a very controversial document. It's an Eastern Aramaic version in common use in the Syriac Church. Perceda simply means the plain or simple version. Its literary history is very complex and problematic. It was a lot of debate exactly where it came from and what a history is. And there aren't any big particular doctoral issues out of this. It's just, it has some where it really came from is a point of scholastic dispute. It doesn't affect any of our direct issues anyway. The most important series are the Septuagint, the Greek translations. There's a number of them in papyrus, the papery uncealed. Uncealed is a style of all capitals and usually without spaces. It's the way they are. There's hundreds of these. A lot of these were found in the 2nd century BC and following. Chester Beatty is one of the most important collections. And that's the 2nd through the 4th century AD. And there's a lot of pre-Christian parchment fragments that are in various libraries. It's about the 4th century that vellum starts to surface. And there are 3 important codexes, Vaticaniciniaticus and Alexandrinus. All 3 of these really had their origin in Alexandria, Egypt. And we're going to talk more about them before we're finished. And they are among the oldest complete manuscript. There are fragments that are older. But these 3 are almost complete of the Old Testament and there from the 4th through the 10th centuries. Then there's the cursive script start showing up, the miniscules as they call them. And that's where there's a cursive script. They appear in the 9th century and into the medieval period. And there's a long list of these that we don't have to get into just there. There's a plenty of them around. The Latin version show up in the 2nd century under Ticulian and following. And we have fragments of the Old Latin. It gets translated because Latin begins to replace Greek in the 3rd century. It's a Jerome is commissioned by Pope Nemesis I and he translates the available versions of the Old Latin into what's called the Vulgate, which is a commonly used Latin version. And it's really a composite of the Septuagint, the Hebrew, the Latin, and other manuscripts that were available at that time. And then we have a lot of quotes from the early church fathers that from this period that are that impact or Latin understanding. I'll give you a summary of all this a little bit here. We can't talk about manuscripts without making illusion of course to one of the most important finds and that's the Dead Sea Scrolls. There are 11 caves at Wadi, CUMRAN. Over 600 manuscripts, 200 of those are biblical, not all of them are biblical, a lot of other things too. There were 60,000 fragments, many of which have yet to be examined fairly, 85% leather, 15% papyrus. In cave 4, there were 40,000 fragments of 400 manuscripts over 100 biblical. Every book except the book of Esther was found among those fragments. There's a number of them at what they call group one at Wadi CUMRAN and also Masada. All of these predate 70 AD, the all predate the fall of Jerusalem. All of these agree with both the Septuagint as we understand the Septuagint and the forlaga. So it's very, very important corroboration of the actually what we have in our hands. A second group that are found in a couple of other reasons nearby places, we're hidden after 100 AD. So these are after the Council of Yomniya. All these agree with a Masoretic text. So it's interesting that the difference between the Septuagint and the forlaga on the one hand and the Masoretic and the other, the dividing between that is the Council of Yomniya, where obviously they made decisions and adopted practices to go in a slightly different direction. One of the things that give you an example, I was doing some research having to do with Ezekiel 38 and I happened to stumble into Amos 7-1. Amos 7-1 in your Bible from the King James reads as follows, thus have the Lord God showed unto me and behold he formed grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up to the latter growth and lo it was the latter growth after the King's Moans. What does that mean? I have no idea. It makes absolutely no sense to me as it stands. If you turn to the Septuagint, that verse looks very different. There came locusts upon the earth let me back up. When you're in the book of Revelation, there's a passage in Revelation 9, it speaks to the locusts upon the earth and they had a king over them which is the angel of the bottom of the pit whose name in the Hebrew tongue is a baden but in the Greek tongue have his name Apollion. The locusts have no king according to Proverbs 30 verse 27. Why is Proverbs 30 verse 27 there? So that we'll understand in Revelation 9 that the locusts here are idiomatic. They're not literal locusts. They're demons of some kind and locusts is being used as a figure of speech. So from that background in Amos 7-1, if you read Amos 7-1 in the Septuagint, it says, Thus the Lord showed me and behold a swarm of locusts were coming and behold one of the young devastating locusts was Gog the king. That's in the Greek, the precision Greek. There are some blemishes in the Hebrew that causes the confusion translation as you find in the Messeritic version. Here in the Greek version it's pretty clear that what's being talked about here are locusts in the demonic sense because Gog is the king. These locusts have a king which means they're demons. And I can remember when I stumbled into this I was blown away that wow could be because in Ezekiel 38-39 this Gog guy shows up Gog and Magog with no background, no linkage. It's very strange in the Bible to find an important person without some kind of explanation or links to him. And suddenly it becomes very clear that the Gog is a title of a demon king. In those days I had a routine where I would spend my Tuesday nights with Hal Insina study. I'd do a service at his church that evening and then I had a breakfast Bible study the following morning, I'd spend the night with Hal. His home and we used to wrap for hours and his study at night. Well I was all excited because wow here's a discovery for Gog that I'd never ran into in any of their literature and how dug out his Septuagents and stuff and we dug out in reference and sure enough it's correct. It's fact that's not even a variant reading. It's accurate. And I was blown away but Hal wasn't that you know because here's all these people interested in prophecy in Ezekiel 38's been studied for centuries. And yet I never come across any remarks like this and anything Hal was not surprised. He says the fulfillment of Daniel 12.4. But thou would Daniel shut up the words and seal the book even at the time of the end for a manger run to and fro and knowledge will be increased. Many people quote this verse as knowledge in general but the context implies the knowledge that will be increased as knowledge of prophecy. And Hal's point is that as we get closer to the end times we should not be surprised to make discoveries that have alluded scholars in the past. And that blew me away. I was very excited. His point was that you should expect that. And so it's interesting but again the key to unraveling the Old Testament was the Septuaget translation in the Greek. And so the question also comes up now is the Bible in the arrant? Does the Bible have errors in it? And I always, you know I was at teenager I believe in the Bible and so forth. I had a friend that was a son of a Unitarian minister. So he knew his Bible but he didn't take it seriously. He said what about King 723 and he'd always throw this at me because in 1 Kings 723 it deals with Solomon's this big labor for the temple which is 10 qubits in diameter, 5 qubits deep and it has a circumference of 30 qubits around. In other words everyone knows that circumference is not three times the diameter. And so this is not a big deal but it's wrong. It would seem that the circumference is three times diameter and according to the text and yet we know it's not three times it's pie 3.14159 or whatever there's this peculiar number of pie that relates to the circumference of the diameter. Well I didn't have an answer in those days but later years they were out by explained it to me as we were talking about this. If you look at that passage in the Hebrew, the word for circumference is misspelled and when the masquerades found an error they didn't correct it. They made an annotation in the margin. The error that parent error was called a katif and the corrected version was in the margin called a kiri. As part of the respect for the text they wouldn't change it but they'd annotate what they thought was the correct spelling. Well the point is Hebrew is like both Hebrew and Greek these are two languages that have a distinctive in that each letter of the alphabet has a numerical value and that is exploited in a number of ways. Under a Hebrew alpha numerics if you take the katif the way it was written in the Messerich text there's a cop of av and a hay. The way it should be written normally is a cop and avov. Well a cop is about 100 the av6 and the hay5. So the way it should be written is 106. The way it is spelled is 111 because there's a hay thrown in there at the end of it. Well if you correct that ratio for the 31 qubit circumference you'll discover that it's in a length it's about 46 feet there's an error of less than 15 thousandths of an inch so it makes that adjustment. Now some people also point out that that can also be accredited by a hand breath that that was the thickness of the of the labor that plowman's building and so they they don't see a problem there. But there are something else that comes up with all of this that I have to share with you. There are a couple of constants in the universe that are dimensionless. There are two of them in view here. One is pi. It's a dimensional constant. Pi is 3.14156 of 159 on and on. Pi is the same number no matter what whether you're in metric or English whatever what whatever units you're measuring it doesn't matter. It's a dimensional constant you follow me. There is another one that you probably have not run into unless you've been an advanced man. If you had a course in calculus or advanced engineering or advanced mathematics you've come across this peculiar number called E 2.7183 and so on. I'll come back to that in a minute. There are two major passages in the Bible that have to do with the creation. Genesis 1 1 of course and John 1 1. Well it's interesting if you take Genesis 1 1 and you take it in the Hebrew and you take the number of letters times and the product letters divided by the number of words times the product of the words. If you do that it turns out you get pi to four decimal places. Well that's kind of interesting. I don't want to do with that. Curious it's a little bizarre. John Napier by the way is the guy at the mathematician that discovered the the properties of this peculiar number E. He actually was an activist for the Reformation in Scotland. He's the one that first used decimal points and fractions but he's the inventor of logarithms and the natural or an opinion logarithms named after his honor is log to the base E. It has all kinds of properties and advanced mathematics. You'll find it in the way of mechanics electrical theory, distribution of prime number. It shows up everywhere in strange ways. This peculiar number called E and turns out to be approximated by 2.71828182828 so on. Anyway what's interesting if you take the other major creation passage in the beginning was the word, the word of the word of the word was God, John 1-1 and you take that in the Greek and you do the same thing we did with the Genesis passage. The number of letters times the product letters divided by the number of words times the product of the words. You get E for decimal places. Now I don't know what you do with that. It doesn't prove anything exactly and yet it's interesting that everywhere we turn we discover properties in the biblical text that clearly went beyond the understanding of the people that wrote it. There's no way you'll ever convince me that John was acquainted with the period of logarithms and contrived this. No this is a fingerprint of the Holy Spirit in my view. Along the same line I'd like to share with you this whole issue are there hidden message in the Bible. Big debate these days. The scripture says so it's the glory of God to conceal a thing and it's the honor or duty of kings to search out a matter. A rabbi in the 16th century in his writings said the secrets of the Torah are revealed in the skipping of letters very interesting enigma that emerges in the ancient rabbinical writings. This leads to a phenomenon that is known as the equidistant letter sequence. What do I mean by that? I can take a simple sentence. This is just one contrived to be an example here. Rips explained that each code is a case of adding every fourth letter to form a word. If you take in this simple little example every fourth letter it turns out that that is another message and if you take every fourth letter it says read the code. Now this is just contrived to get across to you what an equidistant letter sequence that in a sentence you can hide another message by every andth letter, every third letter or fourth letter some some particular schema. Mechanically those are hard to find. There are rabbis that do it mechanically even to this day but most people today will use a computer to search for these things. Let's take the book of Genesis as an example and this is the book of Genesis. Remember that Genesis Hebrew goes from right to left all languages flow towards Jerusalem. Nations that are east of Jerusalem go from right to left nations that are west of Jerusalem go from left to right interestingly enough. But in any case the word for Torah in Hebrew are four letters a tauv av a reh and a he which is equivalent to our TORH in a sense. If you go the book of Genesis starting in the upper right-hand corner go to the first tau or T and count 49 letters you come to a vav then you count 49 letters again you come to a rush and then you count 49 letters again you come to a hay which in the Hebrew spells Torah. Now you say well okay that's so what that could just be that way by a statistic laxident. When you go to the book of Exodus you discover rather astonishingly the same thing happens you go for the first tau 49 letters to the first vav 49 letters to the first rush and 49 letters more to the first and to the next you find a hay and you have again Torah happening twice like this starts to blow any statistical accident kind of theories because that's pretty that that that seems very deliberate to anyone analyzing. When you go to the next book of Leviticus it doesn't happen then you almost feel a sense of relief probably. When you get to numbers something even stranger occurs it happens again with 49 letter intervals but it spells Torah backwards. Now this raises a question to my mind they must have had time on their hands I don't know how they found this okay and you go to Deuteronomy the same equivalent thing happens. Now now it's puzzling you got Torah spent spelt forward in Genesis and Exodus backwards in Numbers and Deuteronomy each in 49 letter intervals. Let's go back and examine ek the Leviticus and we discovered not a 49 but seven the square root of 49 and we find that at seven letter intervals we have the Yatheh Vavheh or the Hovah or Yahweh however you want to pronounce the unpronounceable name of God and now when you stand back and look at this overall design. Genesis Exodus it's spelled forward numbers in Deuteronomy it spelled backwards the Torah always points to Yatheh Vavheh. So now the question is okay this is cute what about it there are people that would argue that this just is a statistical accident I don't think so. I think this is the fingerprint of the Holy Spirit and we find things like this laced all through the Bible different kinds of things. The word Israel if let's search for the Israel in Hebrew in the first 10,000 letters of Genesis searching intervals from minus 100 to plus 100 it only occurs twice at intervals of seven and fifty not to a Jew those are significant numbers because that every Shabbat they cite the kudush in Genesis 1 verse 23 on the Jubilee or after seven smitches and so forth the fifty also and there's more to it I'll leave that going now the trees in Genesis 2 and Genesis 1.9 God said I give you every herb-bearing seed which is the face of the earth every tree which is the fruit of the tree yielding seed to you it shall be for food and so forth at the end of verse chapter 1 to the beginning of chapter 2 out of the ground the Lord God made every tree that is pleasant to the site and good for food the tree of life and so on. So from verse 1 chapter 1 verse 29 to chapter 2 verse 9 in that segment of biblical text we find the 25 trees that you'll find in the Bible encrypted in those in those within that space and so that's interesting and there are those that would argue well that's just a statistical accident but I don't think so. We also find in Deuteronomy speaking of the Holocaust we find Hitler Auschwitz, the crematorium for my sons, the Fuhrer, Eichmann, King of the Nazis, Auschwitz, several places, Germany, Hitler, and minecomph all these are encrypted there in various places, the so-called Holocaust. In Isaiah 53 we find this, which some people would call the Holy of Holies of the Old Testament. We find the Messiah, Nazarene, Galilee, Pharisee, Levi, K.I.F.S. and us pass over a handful of other apparently relevant illusions but the one that's really exciting to me in Isaiah in those 12 verses you have encrypted the people who were at the foot of the cross. You've got Peter, Matthew, John, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, James. In fact you find two James, there were three James's but the third James was not a believer to laugh in the resurrection. We have Simon, Thaddeus, Matthias, we have three Mary's there and there were three Mary's at the foot of the cross. So, lo and me and Joseph, in fact one of the Mary's is encrypted in such a way as it's interlinked with John by the way. But even more impressive to me than the names that are encrypted in those 12 verses is a name that's missing. There is a name that consists of very high frequency letters in Hebrew that statistically should show up in that space by just a statistical accident. You'd expect to see it just from raw statistics and in this case it's conspicuous because it does not appear. That name is Judas. Interestingly enough. So, let's talk a little more about Yachts and Titles. I want to quaint you a sense. Jesus said, think not that I come to destroy the law of the prophets. I come not to destroy but to fulfill for very less into you till heaven and earth pass when yachts are when Titles show a no wise past and the law till all be fulfilled. To me, he's calling attention to even subparts of the letters themselves when you are at a title. I want to highlight briefly some characteristics of the Hebrew alphabet. The aliph is the first letter of the alphabet. That's why it's alphabet. It's the very term alphabet as a Hebrew term by the way. Aliph Beth is what it speaks of. Anyway, aliph on the right side shows how it appears today in Hebrew. It's a original presentation before Babylon in the early Hebrew was like a long horn steer. It represented an ox. So the word aliph is first, first letter. Also represents like an ox which means strength. This is strength or leader. The second letter is a bet on the right side is the way it appears today in Hebrew. On the left side is the way it used to appear. It looks like a little teepee if you will. That little symbol gets turned to become RB if you will but that's generations later. The bet really represents house. House or family with that sin house, the family, like Beth Leham or Beth L. House of God or House of Breater House of God. Okay, so if you take an aliph and a bet together on the right side is the way it would write today in Hebrew but in the ancient Hebrew it would look like showing you on the left on the slide there, the long horns here and this little teepee thing. The word ab, pronunciation at A and a B is ab. What does it mean? Well, the aliph means the first or the leader the strength of and the Beth is the house. So this means it's the leader of the house. It's the Hebrew word for father or if you want to say daddy it's aba but it's aba is the father. Let's go one step further. There's a Hebrew letter called a hay. It's a breath and it may represent hands lifted up or an open window. There's all speculations of what originally meant but in the letter implies behold or revealed. It also implies a breeze or wind or spirit. It's very similar to the H where it's a breath. Remember Eliza Dooliter in George Bernard Shaw's Pignolian made into the musical of my fair lady. She had to practice her aces in Hartford, Harford, Hampshire, Hurricane's hardly happened. She had to practice. Remember the hay is the Hebrew equivalent of the H. If you put a hay in the middle of a word it's inserting a breath or in that word. So a hob is the essence of the aliph and the Beth is the father putting the hay in there gives you the essence of the father. What is the essence of the father? Is the Hebrew word for love? Love is the essence of the father. The point I'm trying to make here is the letters carried the meaning, not just the sound. And that if you under the Hebrew Department of University of Arizona, it's pointing out to me that if they teach the kids how to recognize Hebrew in terms of the ancient Hebrew, at least half an hour to do that and make a list of 22 and learn them. If you can do that you can, they discover the kids can read about 80% of Hebrew because by knowing the letters and what the letters signify you can make a very informed guess of the semantics of the passage. When Abraham and Sarah had their names changed, this is the way they were spelled before in Genesis 17. When God changes the name from Abraham to Abraham and Sarah to Sarah, all he did was add a hay in their names. Abraham and Sarah, he is signifying the presence of the Spirit of God. Well, I want to give you a riddle now. Who's the oldest man in the Bible? Methuselah, good for you. You live in 1969. Well, yet he died before his father. How can he be the oldest man in the Bible yet he died before his father? That's your little, that's your question for your small group meeting this week, ask him. And of course, what everybody forgets who his father was. His father was Enoch. Who didn't die, he was translated. In fact, when Enoch was 65, something happened from that point on he walked with God for over three hundred years. He apparently was given a prophecy that the flood of Noah did not come to surprise him and preached on for four generations. But Enoch was told when his son was born that as long as his son is alive, the flood would be with, the judgment of the flood would be withheld. So he named him Methuselah, which comes from two Hebrew roots, Muth, which means his death, that occurs 125 times in the Old Testament, and the verb shall act, which means to bring or send forth. Methuselah really means his death shall bring. In fact, if you do your homework in Genesis 5, you'll discover that Methuselah was born and when he was a hundred and eighty seven, lambic was born and when he was a hundred and eighty two, Noah was born and it was the six hundredth year of Noah that the flood came and if you do your math here you'll discover the year that Methuselah dies is indeed the year the blood come. I always ponder this. Can your girls imagine what it was like raising that kid? Every time you caught a cold, the entire neighborhood would probably panic. In any case, if there's all the significance hidden behind the name Methuselah, what about the other ten names in this genealogy in the book of Genesis from Adam to Noah? We have Adam, Seth, Enoch, Kenan, Mahaloel, Yare, Enoch, Bethuzal, and Lemek. The problem with these names is they're not translated in your Bible. If you have a lexicon, it doesn't translate proper names and the way you have to unravel these is to get into the Hebrew roots and find out what the words mean and since we've learned so much from Methuselah, let's take a look at these others. What does the word Adam mean? Well, man, that's a reasonable good, out of mom means man. His son was named Seth and Seth comes from a root which means appointed. In fact, in Genesis 4 verse 25, Eve said when he was born that God hath appointed me another seed instead of able whom came slow. So the word Seth, she even tells us, implies appointed. Seth has the son by name of Enoch which means mortal, frail, or miserable. It comes from the root Anash which is to be incurable like a wound or grief or wickedness or what have you. It really means incurable. Kenan means sorrow, dirge, or elegy and his son is Mahaloel. He's probably had enough because he and his father's name to miserable and so forth. So he decides to end all that. He names his son when he's born Mahaloel. That's a mouthful but it's a great name. It comes from two roots. Mahaloel which means the blessed or praised one and Elle, the name of God. Mahaloel, Mahaloel means the blessed or praised God or blessed God. He has some of the name of Yared which is a verb. The verb Yared, meaning shall come down and I'll come back to that in a minute. Enoch, we've mentioned already but what does his name mean? It's an academic term. It means commencement or teaching. And Methuselah we talked about means from Muth and Shilak means his death shall bring and as I pointed out that that was the year the flood came when he died. His son is lambic and here's a root that we use in the English and it's still evident in lament or lamentation that really comes from a root meaning despairing. And lambic has a son by the name of Noah. How many of you have heard of Noah before? It's about 70 percent. Not bad. Okay, I'm kidding. But we use the name but what does it mean? Malamic explains it comes from Nacham which means to bring relief or comfort. Lambic even mentions that when Noah's born that he shall comfort us and so forth. He explains it that you can draw these even from the text itself. Well now let's take a look at this genealogy with this having had this little Hebrew lesson and we have Adam, Seth, Enoch, Kenan, Mahalala, Yairad, Enoch, Patusalalalalak, and Noah. Let's read it in English. Man, the pointed, mortal, sorrow. The blessed God shall come down teaching that his death, whose death, God's death shall bring the despairing, comfort or rest. Every time I do this I get goosebumps. Here is what you, a reasonable summary of the Christian gospel tucked away in the early chapters of Genesis. Now this has several implications. First of all it's clear that well let's put it this way. You can never convince me that a group of Jewish rabbis contrived to hide the Christian gospel in a genealogy in the Torah no way. But it also says something else. It speaks of course to the integrity of design. That's why I bring it in here. But it also indicates that God's plan of redemption was not a knee-jerk reaction to a surprise that Adam blew it. It was planned before the foundation of the world. That's when God first started dealing with you before the foundation of the world. He had you on his mind. And here's a demonstration of that hidden in the text itself. For our purposes here the primary implication is that this collection of 66 books and by over 40 guys over several thousand years is a skillfully designed package. Every detail, every place name, every detail, every number is there by deliberate design. And God always rewards the diligent. If we'll take the trouble to dig in behind each one of these things will be a discovery. I leave that with you. One integrated, the New Testament is in the Old Testament concealed. This is an example. And of course the Old Testament is in the New Testament revealed. I published a book called Cosmic Codes, Hidden Messages from the Edge of Eternity, which includes a background tutorial on cryptography, which of course is what it's all about. Many people writing this field have no cryptography background. That's really what you need to really understand what's going on. And then we deal with microcodes, macrocodes, metacodes, and then how to search for them yourself. We do spend some time, but not a lot of time, on the equidist and letter sequences. They're the codes that are so controversial today. We spend out of 25 chapters, spend two or three on them. But there's far more interesting codes in the Bible and you don't need a computer to find them. And so I challenge you to take a look at this and find out how you really study the scripture for yourself. In our next session we're going to focus on the New Testament itself, how reliable is it. We'll talk about some problem areas and the modern translations that are so controversial in some cases. And I'm going to show you a hidden security mechanism that will assure its authenticity that's been running reliably for thousands of years. And we'll take a look at that in our next session. Well, welcome to the second session in which we're going to explore our New Testament, how reliable our texts. We'll talk about some of the principle controversies, the King James versus the NIV and others. And many people ask me which version is best. We'll talk a little bit about that. But under scoring all of this is the fundamental issue. How do we really know that the Bible is the Word of God? That's our challenge. Well, the New Testament is our subject, the Old Testament that we viewed in the first session, was compiled over several thousand years. However, the New Testament was compiled within one lifetime. So they're dramatically different in many respects. The early church had its disposal for gospels. They had Luke in two volumes. It ultimately gets split into Luke volume one and volume two called the Book of Acts. But actually, they really can be viewed as four gospels, including Acts. Then we have what some people would call the Pauline Corpus of Letters and the other epistles. And these were all circulated along with the Septuagint for instruction and worship. The early church, the first century church, took as their scriptures, the Septuagint Old Testament, the four gospels as they finally assembled. And these body of letters that were written with the understanding they would trade letters. And trading letters meant that they also would make hand copies of them. We'll talk a little bit about that as we go. It's interesting for us to realize that Luke and Paul, if you examine their texts, rely on the fact that their talking to contemporary eyewitnesses. They understood their readers to also have been eyewitnesses to many of these events. And one of the things that is also conspicuous in the New Testament scriptures is the things they don't talk about. There's no mention in these letters and so forth of Nero's persecutions after 64 AD. That's when Nero really started to be blaming the Christians for the burning of Rome and all that business. That's conspicuous by not being mentioned. The execution of James, which occurred in 62 AD, he was the leader of the church in Jerusalem. And when he was executed, you would think that that would get into the letters. What this is and what this all implies is those letters were written prior to these dates as the point. A point that's often overlooked by some of those critics. The Jewish revolt against the Romans in 66 AD, which ultimately leads to the fall of Jerusalem. In fact, you really won't understand the peculiar book of Hebrews, unless you understand that it was written to Jewish believers while the temple was still standing. That was the deals with the paradox that was confronting the Jewish believers in those days. And the destruction of Jerusalem in 78 AD is not mentioned anywhere in the New Testament documents, which indicates they were in existence prior to these historical events. Now, Jesus, as I was not born out before, is the common language in that day was Aramaic, but he also spoke Greek and did so in Mark 7, he spoke Greek to Mary in the garden on Resurrection Morning, and she didn't recognize him until he addressed her in Aramaic in John 20. And Pilate was fluent in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Hebrew, because that was the territory that he was responsible for, Greek, because that was the business language of that day, and Latin, because that was the official language of the empire. So he spoke, and when he wrote the title himself, to put on the cross, he wrote it in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and did so deliberately embarrassing the Pharisees by making an acronym of Yorthev-Aphae in the way he wrote it. And they asked him to change it, and he wouldn't, because he was obviously upset, because he understood he was delivered up for envy. There are syntactic peculiarities in the New Testament worth and that noticing. It's interesting that the sentence structure is that Hebrew are likely than Aramaic, and Mark quotes Luke in hundreds of places, Mark quotes Acts in 150 places, and Mark knew the Thessalonians, Corinthians, Romans, Colossians, and James, apparently from his writings. So the contemporaneous nature of these things is important for us to understand. There are 600 evidences of an early date of Luke, and there's lots of different discussions which came first and what are there, and there is one school of scholastic thought commonly called the Jerusalem school that assumes that the original drafts were in Hebrew. Out of that, about 40 to 45 comes a rough Greek version, and this revolves into a Greek and Aramaic variation. Sometimes called the Q document in the minds of some scholars, and some feel that the Q document is really the Hebrew drafts, but those are all speculations, because we don't have copies of it. Then gradually we have a Greek adaptations, and Luke is regarded one of the earliest interestingly enough by this particular school of scholars, followed by Mark, and then followed by Matthew with a heavy influence from the Hebrew drafts, because he is very much it's very much a Jewish document, if you will, and John is distinctive on its own right. So that is the profile by many. Now, one of the things that is overlooked is the use of a professional stenographer called, and classically called, and the Manuensis. These documents you realize were written by hand. They didn't have printing presses, and they didn't have copiers. These were all hand written. That's why they're called manuscripts, manue from their hand written, if you will, and it's interesting that they're much of the New Testament was written by professionals. First Peter was written by a guy by the name of Sylvanas, who was a hyperetis, which means under-rower, a supporter, if you will, and Tertius wrote Romans, and he's mentioned in Romans 1622. John Mark, the young man, John Mark, apparently had the skill of being a stenographer, and that's why many scholars believe that he was the one that actually Peters gospel for him, that the gospel of Mark is really Peter. It's very much Peter style. It's an action document. It's like a shooting script. So the point I'm really getting at is these are just three of the cases where we know their names. It's clear if you compare first Peter and second Peter in the Greek, first Peter is very polished Greek. It was written for Peter by a professional stenographer. I assume that Sylvanas did for Peter what Tracy does for me. Most of the documents that you see in the newsletter are cleaning up the mess that I hand her. If it looks good, that's Tracy at work. Likewise, Sylvanas is evident in first Peter. When you read second Peter, which Peter wrote himself, it's a very rough Greek, very different style. Clearly, without the benefit of Sylvanas and so on. One of the things you need to understand is there was in those days, a professional skill at shorthand writing. In fact, in Psalm 45 verse 1 in the Septuagint, the way it's translated in your Bible, 45, one, it speaks of the ready writer in the King James or the skillful writer in the NIV, what they're translating there in the Septuagint is Oxographos, which is a synonym for tecographos, which is a shorthand writer. Now, what's significant about this Greek term in the Septuagint, that was translated three centuries before Christ's ministry, and that meant that that technical term was in common language on the street, because it's in coin A Greek. It's not a scholar's language, it was the common language, and there was in the vocabulary of the man on the street a term for a stenographer or a ready writer or a shorthand writer. Now, what's interesting here is that Matthew was a former customs official according to Matthew 9.9. So he would have had to have a working knowledge of tecography, which is basically he was he had skill at shorthand. So he would have been able to transcribe the sermon on the Mount verbatim. One of the reasons Matthew's gospel is longer than the others is because he includes the discourses extensively. He actually, I believe, wrote them out. He was able to. So you have to understand the customs official issue. He spent his day in business correspondence, and they had no copiers or carbon paper. So a lot of writing was required for receipts and whatever, and so that was a skill that was required of a person in that kind of a job, classification. So that was a skill that Matthew had that also explains why his gospel is longer. If you take the discourses out of Matthew, it's shorter than Mark. It's shorter than Mark, but makes it longer is because he has several of the major discourses extensively verbatim, and so that gives you another insight. Something else that's emerging up until this time, most documents were in scrolls. We've all seen the scrolls. That's why I used a little scroll as my idiom for when I show scripture on the screen where the scroll is from the Old Testament. In the New Testament period, we're beginning to see vellum notebooks where they have pages. What's called a codex is what you and I would call a notebook. When you see when you have pages, that's called a codex. With vellum, you could write on the front and back, papyrus, it was a little uncomfortable around the back because the back side was rough. But for vellum, you could write on both sides and they did. In fact, in the 2nd Timothy 413, Paul mentions the membranny, Latin word transcribed in the Greek, referring to a parchment notebook, predecessor to the subsequent codex, which is the ultimate departure from the scrolls. He says in 1st Timothy 413, the cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus went, now come, bring with thee and the books, but especially the parchment. The word parchment's there is the word membranny, which is refers to a parchment notebook. So we're finding in the text these things are starting to emerge and they, the practicality of having pages around these cumbersome scrolls. You could turn right to where you wanted to go without having to fuss with a 20 foot long scroll is obviously a far more practical. So the what displaces the previous scrolls were parchment's codices. Another thing that we notice in the text that have great significance are abbreviations. Some of you may be familiar with Ziff's law. It turns out that in language, among other things, when something starts to be used frequently, you adopt a shorter version of that. If you're in biology and you're going to talk about de-oxyriba nucleic acid, you quickly say, well, that's DNA. If you're in political science and you're going to talk about the North Atlantic Treaty Organization several times in a paragraph, you quickly call it NATO. You adopt what's called an acronym. You take the first letters or some abbreviation. It turns out, it may surprise you to discover that you're doing that follows a mathematical law that when the frequency of something occurs enough, it's cumbersome enough, if you take the rank, if you list your vocabulary, the word most frequently and then next frequently make a list in rank order of often you use a term you'll discover the rank order and the number of times you use it is a constant. And that turns out to be a mathematical procedure that minimizes your effort. In fact, it's called the principle of least effort. But in any case, these kinds of things actually follow certain mathematical laws. Well, it turns out that in the early church the same thing was true. They're having to hand right all these things. So there's certain words that be for which they adopted abbreviations and they call these the nomena sacra because the very abbreviation implies a common understanding or common usage of a doctrine. Here's some examples. Christos is in the Greek, spelled out with surprising enough, homie letters, seven letters. I think that's interesting. But what they quickly and writing a lot about Christ, they would use the first two letters to represent Christ. And that was not an area of disrespect. In fact, it was indicated, it was a form of respect. Jesus, yes, yes, again, it takes the first and last letter here as an abbreviation. Theos for God is an abbreviation that appears in these letters. The Holy Spirit, instead of spelling out numa, they just use three letters and the Greek. Now, the one that's probably the most interesting is that term of Lord because the word Lord occurs again and again and again in their vocabulary. But where it is referring to God as Lord, it's abbreviated with the copusigma, the two letters. In fact, that scholars make a big thing of that because it indicates that among these writers, they treated the term chorios regarding the God as a special title, unique to God. Not just every time the word courage might be used, but where it's a, it had theological significance. The point is, the use of these abbreviations was deliberate and standardized, and therefore reflected their theological position on these topics. And that's a surprising undercurrent, if you will, in the text. Something else that shows up is this term, the first and the last. In Isaiah, at least three times, he says, I am the first and the last, and revelation, he also says it several times the first and the last. And revelation, he also says, I am the alpha and the omega. These are terms, if you're familiar with the Bible, that are very familiar to our ears. There's something that has been overlooked. There's also the same equivalent construction in the Hebrew. Instead of alpha and omega, the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, the aliph and the tau are the first and last letters of the Hebrew alphabet, and the aliph and the tau. When the aliph and the tau together have a machef, a little connecting bar and is used in front of a word, then that construction is used as a grammatical element to indicate the direct object of a verb. And that's the answer you'll get from most rabbis about the the aliph and the tau, but that's only one of four uses of that construction. That construction without the machef is used as a pronoun to indicate the second person masculine singular. And that's used in what's called a hypocatasticis, that's putting down underneath is what it says in the Greek. It's a kind of grammatical pun, if you will. It's defined as a hidden declarative implied metaphor, expressing a a perotive degree of resemblance. They geechuck, what does that mean? Well, in zechariah 12 verse 10, in your Bible, it reads, I will pour upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they've pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourn as far as only son, and shall be in bitterness form as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. There are two untranslated letters between the me and the whom. They shall look upon me, and there's an aliph and the tau whom they've pierced. And so if you look at that in the English, they should look about me whom they've pierced. In the Hebrew, there are two letters that are not translated, and those two letters would appear if they were translated between the me and the whom. Let me read that another way, and they shall look upon me the aliph and the tau whom they've pierced. It could very well be that this is an intentional illusion here to the first and the last, the alpha and the omega in the Greek, if you will. This also occurs elsewhere in the scripture. I'll give you just one case, then we'll move on. In the opening chapter of Genesis, chapter one verse one, in the beginning God, greed, the heaven and the earth. Here again, there is an aliph and the tau and translated. It doesn't have a mccaff, it's not required grammatically. In the beginning, God, the aliph and the tau, created the heaven and the earth. And we have, of course, many passages in the scripture that ascribed the creation to none other than Jesus Christ. And it's all so, because he says, I was the first and the last who was dead and am alive forevermore in Revelation. So we know who the aliph and the tau is. It's none other than the person of Jesus Christ. In the early manuscripts, we have 6,000 copies of the Greek New Testament or portions thereof. I want to contrast that to Homer's Iliad, very venerated among Greek scholars, but we actually have only about 6, we have 10 times as many New Testaments, I mean ancient manuscripts, as we have Homer's Iliad. And the European East tragedies, even half of that. There's also a lapse period for the classical Greek that virtually 800 to a thousand years between the time the events presumably happen in the first manuscripts we've got. The lapse of the New Testament works is one lifetime. We have documents that record it from within one lifetime, not several centuries and so on. I want to talk to a little bit about P64. That's a papyrus that's now been dated before 66 AD. It's a little scrap that includes Matthew 26, verse 23 and 31, 23 on the one side on the back side. It's written on both sides. And it was written in the lifetimes involved. I'll come back to that in a minute. There are a number of papyrus that are very important. And I won't go through each one of these. Simply to say that there's a whole world here of manuscript diligence to dig into of these various scraps and things that are dated. All many of them have been dated like the second third century or earlier. But each with its various controversies. But there is a document. There's a book that was labeled a strange title. It's called the Jesus Papyrus. It's unfortunate label of course. But in 1994, according to the Times, December 24th of 1994, a papyrus believed to be the oldest extant fragment of the New Testament was found in the Oxford Library. It provides the first material evidence that the Gospel according to Matthew is an eyewitness account written by contemporaries of Christ. Now, what is this reporting on? A guy by the name of Caustin Thede. I'll come to him in a minute. Let's back to the papyrus. This, the so-called Magdalene Greek papyrus, 70'slent P64, was a segment of Greek text of Matthew's Gospel that there are three fragments in the shown here on both sides, if you will. A total of 24 lines, segment of Matthew 26, verse 23 and 31. The first point about these, first of all, this text corresponds to Texas Receptus. We're going to talk more about Texas Receptus, which is the principal undergirding of the King James. And the one that's been attacked by the the so-called modern translations. I'll come back to that. But the early, these early fragments support Texas Receptus. But the more important thing, there's a guy by the name of Caustin Thede, who got permission to examine this scrap, these scraps that were in the custodianship of the Oxford Library. And he brought to the task some advanced technology, a brand new scanning laser microscope. And these things are quite remarkable instruments. They can differentiate between 20 millionth of a meter, layers of papyrus. They can measure the height and depth of the ink, as well as the angle of the stylus used by the scribe. They can probably tell whether he's right or left-handed. The use of this microscope is what enabled Caustin Thede to date these manuscripts. And so this is now regarded the oldest manuscript. He compared with the scanning laser microscope with four other manuscripts. One cum ron dated 58 AD, one at Herculinium dated 79 AD at Masada and an Egyptian town of Oxer Incas. And the net of his analysis and published in this book is that either these scraps are the original of Matthew's Gospel or an immediate copy. Written while Matthew and other disciples and other eyewitnesses were still alive. And so the more technology we put on these things, the more we can justify earlier dates. Many of your Bible helps say ascribe the dating of somebody's manuscripts to being the first and second century, wrong. It actually is earlier. It's a contemporaneous. And so getting back to the nomena sacra, Matthew 26 fragment uses these abbreviations for both Jesus and Lord, showing the very, very early use of these abbreviations. This indicates that the deed of Jesus was recognized, centuries before it was accepted as the official church doctrine at the Council of Nicaea in 325 AD. There's a popular novel going around called the Da Vinci Code that is asparious. It's really shabby, right, a document. It twists history. It deliberately distorts history, but it's also confusing a lot of people. It tries to present the idea that the Council of Nicaea selected the books that would be the New Testament. That's nonsense. The New Testament is well established along before the Council of Nicaea. The Council of Nicaea dealt with a totally different set of issues. I won't get it all out here except to say that a lot of people are confused. Clearly Jesus was recognized as Lord in his lifetime. That's why they crucified him was his claim to be God. But also the early documents also indicate these things they weren't the result of a church council as such that was several centuries later on other matters. Anyway, it's being in the Gospel of Mark, come around Fragment 7, 2, 5 was written before a 68 AD within 36 years or maybe less from the resurrection while eyewitnesses were still alive. That's the key point of all of this. I want to get to the Alexandrian codices because there are three codices that are the source of a lot of confusion. Codex Alexandrianus, it was discovered about 1630, it was brought to England, and it was a fifth century manuscript containing the entire New Testament. The noteworthy thing here, it was a complete Bible. It wasn't just this book of that book, it was a comprehensive Bible from the fifth century. In about the 1800s, Codex Sinaiticus was found a German scholar by the name of the invitation to our, discovered this in St. Catharines monastery at the traditional Mount Sinai. This manuscript dated about 350 AD, so again it's fourth century, is one of the two oldest manuscripts of the Greek New Testament. And then there's another one called Codex Manicanus, which has been in the Vatican library since at least 1481, the fifth century. It was not made available to scholars in the middle of the 19th century. It was dated slightly earlier than the previous ones, but anyway these three are regarded as among the oldest manuscripts, complete manuscripts. Now don't confuse the issue of how old they are without complete they are. There are fragments that are older than these are. These just happened to be the oldest ones that are complete, if they follow me. And they give rise, but all three of these appear to have had their origins in Alexandria, which is one of the great libraries in the ancient world. And these have become very controversial for a number of reasons. Now let's get through the English Bible and come back to these. John Wickliff of course is the Oxford theologian, most eminent of his day, and he and his associates were the first to translate the entire Bible from Latin into English, Wickliff. And William Tendale born in the 1494, in the age of the so-called Renaissance, graduated in 1515 from Oxford. He studied Greek and Hebrew. He committed his life to studying the Bible from its original languages or the common man. You need to realize that these guys did what they did under penalty of death. And Tendale was lured out of his home and then burned at the stake by his adversaries. We need to understand that times these were tough times. Here's a rough history of the English Bible Wickliff, that's about 1382 from the Latin. In 1525, Erasmus pulled together the best documents available at the time, most of which were from Byzantium and were in Greek. And what he pulled together in 1525 is sometimes summarized as textus receptors, the text as it was received. It was the official primary basis for subsequent translations. In the following year, Tendale's Bible, fruit was the first English New Testament followed by Luther's Bible, which is the first one in German. Coverdale was an assistant to Tendale and finished what Tendale had started. So he really completed what Tendale hadn't quite finished by age of 1535. Again, each one of these are doing all of these things under penalty of death. You need to understand the dominance of the medieval church in those days. Then we have a series that was the Matthew Bible from Tendale's notes. Then the great Bible, it was called because it was very large and very expensive. Then the Geneva Bible, the bishops Bible, then the Duay Reims Bible, which was read drawn from the Latin, basically the Catholic Bible. We finally get to 1611, which codifies these things into what's called commonly the King James Version. And James VI of Scotland became the King of England and adopted the name James I. And it was under his tutelage that they undertook an authoritative final sort of speak translation. More than 50 scholars, the best they could find, and they had a heavy commitment of prayer at each step of the way. And they were, they drew up on, they had available to them 5,556 manuscripts. All the things that were available before was at third disposal, but the primary thing they relied on was this collection of harassment called Texas Receptus. This document, even to this day, is recognized by most as the noblest monument of English prose. There's none of the modern translations while they may be more readable and they have some advantages. None of them have the majesty or the veneration of the King James Version. We'll come back to that in many ways. Let's talk a little bit about Texas Receptus. You see, at the end of the third century, the illusion of Antioch compiled the Greek text to become the primary standard throughout the Byzantine world. Remember the capital of the world now was in Byzantium, not Rome. And from the 6th through the 14th century, the majority of New Testament texts were produced in Byzantium and were in Greek, not Latin. And 1525 harassment is using 5 or 6 of the Byzantine manuscripts compiled the first Greek text produced on a printing press. And that was the basis for what's called Texas Receptus. So here's a diagram that tries to summarize some of this. The original Hebrew manuscripts assembled in the days of Ezra Nehemiah were called the Verloga as a collection. It gives rise in the third century before Christ to the Greek translation, the Septuagint, the LLX, if you will. Very important points to realize that the Old Testament, we have a copy of how it existed three centuries before Christ. And that's very important from our prophetic point of view of understanding the fulfillment of those prophecies by the person of Jesus Christ. With His crucifixion and the fall of Jerusalem, they have the Hebrews have a constellation, the Yomniath, where they codify their scriptures to what becomes later the 8th and 9th century, the Messeritic text that becomes the Hebrew reliance for our Bible. When you get to about the third century, obviously the Greek gets translated into Latin called the Old Latin, but it's subsequently codified into what's called the Vulgate which takes advantage of not only the Old Latin, but it takes advantage of two other things. It takes advantage of Texas Receptus and it takes advantage of the products out of Yomniath which are becoming the Messeritic text. So the Vulgate is relatively highly regarded. As you move into the more, after the medieval era, with 10-day ill and all those other guys, they're drawing, of course, up on the Vulgate in large measure, they have the Texas Receptus and the Messeritic also. You when you finally get to the King James Bible, the translators there have access then to the Vulgate, of course, to the 10-day ill-bibles and all of that, and they also have the Septuag- the Texas Receptus, of course, and they have the Messeritic text. Now, let's go back to Alexandria with his Alexandrian courtesies. You know, it's interesting, Satan's strategy always has been one of creating doubt. Yay, half God said, and with additions or amendments or what have you. In 55 A.D., the twisting already begins. Second Peter II deals with that. You just put in your notes in the issue of time, we'll keep moving here. One of the things that starts happening is that the Greek philosophy and concepts are starting to be embedded in the attitudes of the people at that time. And so the beginning to disparage the existing writings of both the Old Testament and the New. And one of the centers for these kinds of the introduction of Greek thought was, of course, Alexandria. And the Gnostics, as they're called, they call themselves, implying that they know and you don't, their knowledge was kept sort of secret. You had to be part of the end group to really know what they're dealing with here. They had an attitude that all materials evil, and they tried to distance themselves from the material universe and so on. And thus Christ was not really God in the flesh. Jesus was really just a phantom. Only had the appearance of being there. He didn't leave footprints in the sand. And they had all these crazy ideas that came. Gnosticism is actually a collection of all kinds of bizarre ideas. It's not a unified presentation. But much of, it was a strange mix of what you and I would consider a new age and also the Greek philosophies mixed in with appearance of Christianity. And this was gaining momentum even before John died because his letter, his first epistle of John, deals with this in several places. His first epistle is pretty much a rebuttal of Gnosticism. But one of the things that Gnostics did is they expregated the scriptures. They would delete things from the scriptures. They were known for mutilating the scriptures. In 156 AD, Aaron Aes said of the Gnostics, quote, wherefore they and their followers have been taken themselves to mutilating the scriptures, which they themselves have shortened. In other words, I want you to be aware of the fact that one of the practices of the Gnostics was to delete portions of the scripture. And so the headquarters for the Gnostics was Alexandria. It was the major center of influence. Now these codices, as I've mentioned, these three Alexandrian codices, are the primary reliance of most modern translations. And one of the things that we're going to discover is that in the tides or attitudes of scholarship, in the 19th century, more and more, there was a disparagement of Texas Receptus and a veneration of the Alexandrian codices, saying that the Alexandrian codices were the oldest complete manuscript. We'll lean more on them in less than Texas Receptus. That was fashionable up until maybe 10 years ago. And we're going to see what the benefit of that. Texas Receptus begins to get dethroned when Johannes Albert Bengal in the 1730s produced a text that deviated from Texas Receptus, relying on earlier manuscripts. In 1831 Carl Lachman produced a text that represented the fourth century Alexandrian codices. And then Tregalis, who was a self-taught in Latin heaven Greeks, spent his lifetime publishing and Greek texts that came out before the end of the 19th century. But the point is, these Alexandrian codices that emerged, while they were presumably actually ricotta-fied in the fourth and fifth century, they were discovered in the 16th and 17th century, are beginning to influence the modern translations, the NIV and others. So the question is, are they really reliable? It has been very fashionable to lean heavily on these codices and less than Texas Receptus. And let's see what the difference are. There are two guys that you'll hear a lot about. There's a guy by the name, Brookfoss Westcott and Fenton John Anthony Hort, Westcott and Hort. They were angling in churchmen and they had contempt for Texas Receptus. And so they began to work in 1853 after 28 years. They spent an in Greek New Testament based on Vaticanus and cineaticus, the two of the, what we now regard as corrupt manuscripts. They were influenced by Oregon and others who denied the deity of Jesus Christ. They embraced the Gnostic heresies of the period from the headquarters of the Gnostics in Alexandria. There are over 3,000 contradictions in the four gospels alone between these manuscripts. They changed the traditional Greek in over 8,000 places. Now, Westcott and Hort, they found, just to give you some background on these two characters, they're regarded as the greatest Greek scholars and so forth. Let's look into this a little bit. They found at their Hermes Club where they venerated the messenger of the God, the guide for departed souls, and 1851. They started a guild of Cambridge, quote to conduct serious and earnest inquiry into the nature of supernatural phenomenon, call that spiritism. And Westcott's son said his father's quote, faith in what for a better name one must call spiritism, close quote. In a letter to Archbishop Canterbury, Westcott wrote quote, no one now I suppose hold that the first three chapters of Genesis, for example, give a literal I could never understand how anyone reading them with open eyes could think they did. So the point is they're not believers. In April 3rd of 1860, Hort wrote, but the book which has engaged me most is Darwin. What may be thought of it, it is a book that one is proud to be contemporary with, my feeling is strong, that the theory is unanswerable. This is Hort's view. How about the the universal fatherhood of God? Westcott believed that the universal fatherhood of God, in Rev. John 10, 28, and 29 he wrote the thought which is concrete in verse 28 is here traced back to its most absolute form as resting on the essential power of God in his relation of universal fatherhood. Westcott said Christians were Christ, Christians are themselves in a true sense Christ. That's his Christology. Hort said, I'm inclined to think that no such state as Eden, I mean the popular notion, ever existed in that Adam's fall and no degree differed from the fall of each of his descendants. He also wrote to us, God, I entirely agree having many years believe that the absolute union of Christian or rather of men with Christ himself is the spiritual truth of which the popular doctrine of substitution is an immoral and material counterfeit. Certainly certainly nothing could be more unscriptural than the modern limiting of Christ bearing on our sins, bearing our sins and suffering to his death. But that is only one aspect of an almost universal heresy. These are the guys we're talking about here. Of course, as I confess, I have no repug, I have no repugged us to the primitive doctrine of ransom paid to Satan, though neither am I prepared to give full assent to it. But I can see no other possible form in which the doctrine of ransom is at all. Tenable, anything is better than the notion of ransom paid to the father. So that's his reference to Matthew 20. Hort writes to another letter. He says, finding Saint Paul's mysterious words without the sharing of blood, there's no remission of sins. I have labored so utterly to apprehend in any measure what his this idea is that I hope you'll deepen and widen the hints you have already given. I'm quite conscious that I have given, but few distinct objections to the common belief, redemption through the blood of the lamb, in what I have written. But so indeed it must be language cannot accurately define the twinge of shrinking horror, which mixes with my thought when I hear the popular notion of sudden. Westcott denies the sinless of Christ. He says, the concept is that of bringing Christ to the full perfection of the humanity which carries with the completeness of power and dignity. The perfection was not reached till after death. Boy. And again, Westcott says, the resurrection seems to me to be the image of man on fallen to a higher life, not future but present, not I shall be here after, but I am in very new age. I have been persuaded for many years that the merry worship and Jesus worship have very much in common with their causes and results. And also for more reasons, the pure romanish view seems to be nearer and more likely to lead to truth than the evangelical. And then hoarding is recorded with having the purgatory is a great important truth. These are the guys, heart denies that heaven is literal, is hardly necessary to say that this whole local language is figurative folly. And he goes on that two lessons that language speaks of a ransom is but figurative. And Hoart says that birds of Christ is figurative. Nothing is nothing. Either this passage or others on the same subject apart from the figurative language of the Thessalonians to show that the revelation here spoken of is to be limited to a sudden pre-natural with theophony. It may be long and varying process though ending in a climax. And he described Texas Receptus' vile and villainous and on it goes. How certainly I, this is the one part he says that I agree with. Westcott admits, quote, how certainly I should have been proclaimed a herateck, close quote. Amen. And you should have been. Now the question you want to answer, would you let either one of these guys teach your Sunday school class? I don't think so. And so they may know a lot about Greek, but they certainly don't know much about the Bible. I want to show you in Westcott and Horst famous translations what was deleted Matthew 613, the entire verse, in the Lord's Prayer, at least not in the temptation but deliver us from evil for the eyes that kingdom the power of the glory forever. Amen. That is deleted by Westcott and Horst. In Matthew 18 verse 11, Christ's mission, the Son of Man has come to save that which was lost. Tyre verse deleted. Matthew 2314, what want to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites for you, devour with his houses and for a pretense, make a long prayer. Therefore you shall receive the greater dimension. The scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites is deleted for some reason. Matthew 2513, watch therefore for you know neither the day nor the hour. What's deleted? Where in the the Son of Man cometh? Watch therefore for you know neither the day nor the hour. For what? These things come that makes sense. Mark 1, 1, the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, what they deleted was the Son of God. And then repentance, he's heard it and said to them that our whole have no need for a physician but they that are sick. I came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. Two repentance is dropped. I came not to call the righteous but sinners. Hey sinners, that makes sense. Unless you're in Austin. Mark 944, the entire verse is deleted where their worm diphth not in the fire is not quenched. They're deleting a journal judgment here. Mark 1126, but if you do not forgive neither will your father which is not having forgive your trespasses then. Tyre verse, deleted. Here's a subtle one, Luke 23, your Bible says and Joseph and his mother marvel at those things which were spoken of him, him being crushed. In the West gotten hurt they changed Joseph to father and father and his mother, his father and his mother marveled at those things which was spoken of him. They're trying to do what? What's the difference? The virgin birth. It's subtle but they're having a way at it. These answers I'm saying is written that mention not lived by better owned but by every word of God. According to West gotten hurt, mention not lived by bread alone but by God. Not every word of God. Again, some of these things are more subtle than others. Luke 2440, and when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet, the entire thing is deleted to cloud this whole issue of a tangible resurrection. John 3.15, then who should ever believe of him, should not perish but have it turn to life. So they should not perish. See again, they're trying to eliminate that punishment. Acts 230. Therefore, being a prophet knowing that God had sworn and asked to him that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh he would raise up Christ's sin as throne, according to the flesh deleted. Again, to bring this into conformance to the Gnostic Prejudices. Acts 8. Philip said, if I believe it's all that heart, thou mayest. And what is the leader was that he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God. That was what the Ethiopian treasure had said. And Acts 9, verses 5 and 6, the entire Paul's call deleted. And he said, who art thou, Lord, and the Lord said, I'm Jesus, who am I periscuse it is hard for you to kick against the bricks. And he trembling as thirring said, Lord, what without having to do, and Lord said, rise and go to the city and shall be told thee without shall do. That whole pair of verses deleted. Romans 14 9, and for this end, Christ both died and rose and both and rose deleted. They agreed that he died. Okay. And Ephesians 3.9, to make all these men see what is the fellowship of the mystery that from which from the beginning of the world have been hidden, God who created all things, what's deleted by Jesus Christ. Again, ascribing the creation to none other than Jesus Christ. They deleted. This cause I bow my knees unto the Father, and they delete of our Lord Jesus Christ. First Peter 1, 22, they delete through the Spirit, saying, you have purified your souls in obeying the truth, unto fun, famed love, try obeying the truth throughout the Holy Spirit. And miss the whole point, for as much as Christ has suffered for us, the for us is deleted. And again, 1 John 5, 7, 8, for the three that by record and heaven, the Father where the Holy Ghost and these three are one and there are three that bear witness in the earth, the Spirit, the water, and the blood, and these three agree and one. These two verses are deleted in a number of manuscripts, incidentally, the West gotten heart are the only ones, but still that's their view. In Revelation 11, 17, O Lord God Almighty, which art and lust and art to come is deleted. We give thanks, O Lord, which art, which exists and used to exist, but nothing about the future, not a big deal, but it's obviously prejudicial. I want to pause here for a minute and suggest and exercise. I want you to imagine taking a sheet of paper, and I want you to create from fiction, from your imagination, the genealogy, and how many could do that? You just create a family tree, right? All of you. Okay, sure. Except I'm going to give you a few rules. I want when you're through and turn in your paper, I want the number of words that you put in your little assignment, your imaginary family tree here. I want the number of words to be exactly divisible by seven. In other words, count the number of words divided by seven, you have no remainder. So you have seven or 14 or 28 or 35, whatever number of words you want, but it's divisible by seven without a remainder. If I let me, it shouldn't be too hard to do you. You can fudge that, right? If you take a random example, you've got six chances of losing one of winning. For a number, a total to end up, there's six chances that it doesn't, that it has a remainder. You follow me, there's six chances of losing one of winning, but that's okay, you can fudge that around, right? But I want the number of letters that you've used to also be divisible by seven exactly without a remainder. That's a little trickier. That takes a little fussing around, but let's assume you could do that. I'm not through. I want the number of vowels and the number of constants, most, both must be divisible by seven. See if, if one's true, the other will be true, but okay. Number of words that begin with a vowel should be divisible by seven. Number of words that begin with a constant must be divisible by seven. Here again, if one's true, the other will be true, all right? The number of words that occur more than once must be divisible by seven. Now, that's getting a little complicated, okay? Those that occur in more than one form must be divisible by seven exactly. Those that occur in only one form, divisible by seven. The number of noun shall be divisible by seven. Only seven words will not be nouns. I mean, anybody still playing? See, each time I put a rule down it complicates it. It makes it tougher. The number of name shall be divisible by seven, and only seven other kinds of nouns will be permitted. The number of male name shall be seven, the number of generation shall be divisible by seven, and you've probably guessed what I've done here already. This happens to be describing the genealogy of Jesus Christ in the first 11 verses of the Gospel of Matthew. But incidentally, it's not in English. It's in Greek, which is far more rigid and far more difficult to make fit because it has so many syntactical rules. And so this is an example. These are the discoveries. What's called the heptatic structure, the seven-fold structure was discovered by Ivan Penn. He was born in Russia in December 12th, of 1855. He exiled from Russia in an early age. He got tangled up in a plot against the ZAR. So he immigrated to Germany and ultimately to the United States. He graduated from Harvard with a PhD in mathematics in 1882. But along the way, he discovered Jesus Christ. Now, every one of us in this room that have discovered Jesus Christ are the result of a miracle of God's initiative. But if you're a PhD from Harvard, that's even a bigger miracle. But he did discover Christ and he also discovered the heptatic structures of the biblical text in 1890. And he devoted the rest of his life into exploring the text. And he generated 43,000 pages with very small handwriting by the way. He was very dense material. 43,000 pages of discoveries. Candidly, they're very tedious to go through because you can quickly get into all these numbers and things. But in that, there are some incredible gems. The one I've just given you is one of those. But he went to his Lord, not over 30th 1942. Incredible, incredible genius. And we're greatly indebted to his insights. But the reason I wanted to give you this background, I want to talk to you about the last 12 verses of the Gospel of Mark. Take your Bible and look up the last 12 verses of Mark. And I believe you will find in the marginal notation a footnote to the effect that these last 12 verses were probably added by some scribe. They're certainly in some dispute. There's some kind of doubt, especially if you have one of the modern translations. There's an issue where these last 12 verses of Mark, because these last 12 verses of Mark do not appear in West Cotton Heart. And they promote the idea that these were probably added by some well-meaning, probably good intentions, but some scribe in later centuries. Because they don't show up in these fourth century manuscripts called the Alexandrian codices. And so what about them? They either, either they were added later or they were deleted in Alexandria. Now, West Cotton Heart of course, argue that it's a later Mark 16 verses 9 to 20s, a later edition. Now, I can destroy this by going to history because Irenaeus, in 150 AD several centuries before the Alexandrian codices, he quotes these verses in his commentary. So that tells you right there that the Alexandrian codices are spurious. And either that or Irenaeus was clairvoyant that he predicted that these verses would be added later. Okay. And I'm not through there. Hippolytus in the second century also comments on these verses. Several hundred years before the Alexandrian codices. So this, from a historical point of view, puts a cloud on the validity of the Alexandrian codices that West Cotton Heart of course, uh, expound. Now, let's just take a quick look at this passage, starting at verse 1, when the Sabbath was fast, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome had butts, sweet spices that they might come and anoint him. And very early in the morning, on the first day of the week, they came under the separate curtain, the rising of the sun, and they set up on themselves, who shall roll away the stone from the door of the separate curtain. And when they looked, they saw the stone was rolled away for it was very, very great. And then in the separate curtain, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment, and they were frightened. He said, I'm going to be not afraid of it. He seek Jesus' magic, which was crucified. He is risen. He is not here behold the place where they laid him. But go your way. Tell us disciples and Peter that he go up before you to Galilee. They, he shall see him as he said unto you, and they went out quickly and fled from the sepoker for they trembled and were amazed. Neither said they anything to any man for they were afraid, period, end of the gospel. That's where West Scott and Hart would say that ends the gospel. Verse 9, unfalling were added later. That's the presentation. And your Bibles may have a foot, and that effect. Let's see what was added later presumably. And she went and told them that had been with him and they mourned and wept and they, when they had heard that he was alive and had been seen a verb, believed not. After that he appeared in another form unto two of them as they walked and went into the country and they went and told it, be unto the residue, neither believed they then. After it appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat and operated them with their unbelief and hardest of heart because they believed not, then which had seen him after he was risen. And he said to them, go you into all the world, preach the gospel every creature and he, they believe with his baptized shall be saved, he, they believe with not shall be damned. These signs shall follow them that believe in my name. They shall cast out devils. They shall speak do tongues. They shall take up serpents and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay hands in the sick and they shall recover. Then so then after the Lord had spoken to them, he was received up into heaven and sat on the right hand of God and they went forth and preached everywhere, though Lord working with them and confirming the word with signs following amen. End of the gospel. Wow. Here is that text we just read. One way to divide it, verses nine and ten are the appearance to Mary and verses eleven to eighteen are subsequent appearances and then we have the conclusion verses nineteen to twenty. Another way to divide it up would be to say the first from verse eleven to fourteen is simple narrative versus fifteen and eighteen is Christ's discourse to them and then you have the final two verses wrapping it up. Those are two ways of parsing that document. I want to show you an authentication system. There's an automatic security monitor that's watching over every letter of the text. It doesn't work ruster wear out. It's been running continually for several thousand years and it's there to protect you. It's a fingerprint signature of the author. You ready for this? Let's take a look and it's a non-compromizable design. Knowing this design, I challenge you to try to outfox it here. The sevens in the Bible, they occur in over six hundred passages. Some over it, some structural, some hidden. They're heptatic signatures are a signature, I believe of God. First of all, if you look at those last twelve verses that, what's about in heart's say we're at it, there's 175 words involved in the Greek and by the way, 185 happens to be a multiple of seven exactly. It's seven times twenty five. The vocabulary, if a list, make a list of all the words that appear, there's ninety eight different words. That's seven times seven times two. How many letters are there? There's five hundred and fifty three. That's a multiple of seven exactly. If some ancient scribe was trying to do this by hand, he's got a challenge, but we've got some more to go here. The vowels are two hundred ninety four at some oboe of seventy exactly. The constants are two hundred and fifty nine in the the molds of seven exactly. The total vocabulary, as I said, was ninety eight. 84 were found earlier in mark, it's a molds of seven. There are fourteen, there are only here. There are forty two that was used in the Lord's address. There were fifty six, they're not part of his vocabulary. Now I've given you nine rules so far. Okay. Now the chance, if I have two rules, the chance, one rule, you have six chances of losing one of winning. If I have two rules, you've got one chance in forty nine of winning, forty eight of losing. It's seven squared. If I have three rules, it's seven cubed. It's one chance in three hundred and forty three of having this happen by mistake or by accident. If you have four, it's two thousand four hundred one and you get the idea. It goes up as the exponentiation. For these nine rules, you've got one chance in over forty million. If a having occurring by just random accident, now I will point out that several of these are mutually exclusive if one's true, the other's true. There's a few of those, but where I'm going to show you we're going to be, we have a factor of two working in our favor here. Now would you like to try this? Would you like to take try to get, you've got one chance in forty million of getting it right by accident. We want to try to do this. Let's assume you're working eight hours a day, forty hours a week, fifty weeks a week, a two week software vacation. That's two thousand men hours a year or a hundred and twenty thousand minutes per year. How long will it take you to do a draft, a candidate draft of those 12 versus? You've got to do forty million attempts presumably to get it right. If you do an average of, if it takes you an average of ten minutes per draft, that's pretty quick. And then you need about three thousand, three hundred and sixty two years. In other words, the do do this by hand is obviously observed, but I'm not through yet. It gets worse. Gets a lot worse. I remember I said that you can divide this by parents to marry the subsequent appearance of the conclusion, or you can divide it by a simple narrative, Christ discourse, or the conclusion. I said there were hundred and seventy five words before. In the address of the Lord, there's fifty six. The rest of the past 119 versus nine to eleven. That grouping, there's thirty five words. There's twelve to eighteen. There's one hundred and five. Each one of these groupings is a multiple of seven. Verse twelve alone is 14 and multiple of seven, thirteen to fifteen, thirty five. Each one of these words, each one of these sections, if you will, includes words that are exact multiple of seven. Now, Greek like the Hebrew has a numerical value assigned to each of its letters. And so again, this gets into gamutry as they call it, or a symmetrical values. The total, symmetrical value, if you take those numerical values and add up the values of the twelve verses of Mark, it adds up to hundred and six thousand, six hundred and sixty three. Guess what? That's a multiple of seven exactly. Versus nine to eleven, verse nine alone, verse ten, the first word, the middle word, the last word, verse eleven. Each of these parcings, the grammatical value is a multiple of seven exactly. The chances of you pulling this off is pretty slim, obviously, because of the complexity involved. I talked about vocabulary, nine and eight words, not before Mark was fourteen, found later than to tell him seven words, in thirty five occurrences. The numerical, numerical value of those is eight thousand, two hundred and forty six, a multiple of seven exactly. And on it goes and goes, as you get the idea. Total number of forms, one hundred and thirty three, the value of those total forms is a multiple of seven exactly. Those that occur more than once, only ones. In fact, when they occur more than once, they occur sixty three times, it's also multiple of seven exactly. And on it goes. There's one word here that occurs only here in the New Testament, no other place. And it has an numerical value of five, 81. Guess what? That's also a multiple of seven exactly. It's preceded by vocabulary of forty two. And by, in any way, each one of these is a multiple of seven exactly. And when I've given you thirty four rules, okay, you say chuck some of those were mutually exclusive. That's okay. Panin has identified seventy five. I'm just taking half less than half of them, all right. Let's assume you want to still try. You're going to need seven to the thirty fourth power. That's five times ten with twenty eight zeros after it. There are three times ten of the seventh seconds per year. I'm going to give you a supercomputer. Let's assume you've got a very fast computer that can do four hundred million tries per second. It can formulate a candidate section of text. It can do four hundred million of those per second, okay. But we've got at four times that's four times ten of the eight tries per second. It's still going to take four times ten of the twelve computer years, or putting another way, you need one million of those supercomputers operating for four point three million years. I'm trying to just get across how quickly those statistics go beyond the realm of practicality become observed, if you will. And incidentally, I've only used thirty four of the distinctive features, Panin catalogs seventy five of them. So admittedly, some of those, there's a few of those that are mutually dependent. You know, if you've got, if you've got the total number of words, multiple seven, and they take vowels and vowels fit, then constants will too. Obviously, you follow me. So there's some of those that will derive. So there's a few of those that are dependent variables, but if you threw those out, we're still talking about a two to one ratio here. So this will weigh out, weigh out a thing. Now, I want to give you some other examples here. The New Testament consists of twenty seven books, right? So each book ends and begins with a word, begins and ends with a word. Well, if there's twenty seven books, there's fifty four words, right? If I think the first and last word of each of the twenty seven books, that turns out to be a vocabulary of twenty eight different words. That's a mode of seven exactly. And in the gospels, it's a mode of seven exactly. The symmetrical value of those words is a multiple seven exactly. The shortest word, which is one letter, as a multiple, as a value of seven, it's a multiple seven exactly. The longest word in the New Testament is a word that has a value of fifteen hundred and twelve, which by the way is seven times six, six times six, then the word is a pocalypsees. Kind of interesting. But this is the one of all these that really blows me away. There's a vocabulary that's unique to Matthew. If I make a list of the words that Matthew uses and isolate those words that only Matthew uses and the other writers of the New Testament don't use them, I come up with a list of forty two words. That's a multiple of seven exactly. And by the way, those forty two words, we've got 126 letters, again, a multiple of seven exactly. Now let's assume for the moment that Matthew contrived to do that deliberately. How would you go about it? The only thing that these words have in common is they're not used by any of the other guys. There's two ways you could do that. One way is to get all the other guys to agree, not to use these forty two words. How many of you think that happened? I don't think so. The other way he could do it on purpose or deliberately is make sure he did his writing last. So he has all the other books in front of him and he goes through all the rigmarone decides, you know, he just says to make this happen. That's not very likely either, obviously. So I can use either to this by prior agreement or his written as like, I could use this as an argument that Matthew's gospel had to be written last. Okay? So the gospel of Matthew has has letter, the words that are unique to him that nobody uses a multiple of seven exactly. Trouble is, so is the gospel of Mark. It was written last. And so is the gospel of Luke written last. And so is the gospel of John written last. Now you're laughing because obviously that's observed. The fact that they could contrive this is observed in the first place. It's a fingerprint of the Holy Spirit, I believe. And James Peter, Jude and Paul each wrote last because each one of these has words that are unique to them that are multiple seven exactly. So now there are words that are multiple seven exactly. If and only if you take the old and new testament together, the name, the word hallelujah occurs 24 times in the Old Testament, four times in the new. That's 28, multiple seven exactly. Hoseana, Shepherd, Jehovah's Abbey, often so on. You go through these words. They're multiple seven exactly. If you take the old and new testament together, only so. God says, you shall not add unto the word which I command you and either shall you diminish from it that you may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you, do not only for two. You also said, do not army what things, whoever I command you observe to do it, thou shall not add there to nor diminish from it. God means what he says and says what he means. The words of the Lord are pure words as the sewer tried in the furnace of the earth, purified seven times. Thou shall keep them old or thou shall preserve them from this generation forever. Psalm 138, I will worship toward the Holy Temple, praise thy name for the heaven kindness and for the truth. I love this one. For thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name. If you know how God feels about his name, then this really has huge weight. He says thou has magnified thy word even above thy name. He takes his word seriously. Add thou not unto his words lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar, probably 30 verse 6. The grass with it, the flower of faith, but the word of our God shall stand forever as in 48. Jeremiah, thus they have the Lord standing the court of the Lord's house and speaking to all the cities of Judah which come to worship in the Lord's house, all the words that I command thee to speak unto them diminish not a word. He tells Jeremiah. Revelation 22, I testify to every man that here is the words of this prophecy of this book of any man shall add unto these things. God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book. The many man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy. God shall take away his part out of the book of life and out of the holy city and from the things which are written in this book. Heaven of the shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. Whose over therefore shall be ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of his father with his holy angels, Mark 8. So a Frederick Kenyon, the noted expert summarized it and he says, we have in our hands in substantial integrity the veritable word of God, indeed. Praise God. And of course the West Cotton Horton, that's one of the reasons that your newest translations lean too heavily on West Cotton Horton. And one of the things that's happening in this classic community is Texas Receptuses, Reestablishing itself is authoritative. And that's why there are many modern translations and they're worth, they're readable, but you will just, if you're maturing, spiritually, you'll outgrow them. And what everybody overlooks in those versions is the question of scripture memory. I'm glad when I was a kid, a teenager, and the revised standard version came out that I was well advised to avoid it. And I'm glad I didn't do my script for memory in RSV because today it's it's an also ran. So it's not so much the problems with every translation has its difficulties, the King James also, but the difficulties are well understood and well known. But if you're to script your memory work, and God says in Psalm 119, I worded, I hid in my heart, that I might not send against the, and many passages suggest memory work, if you're going to do memory work, you want to do it in a version that you know will be around 10, 20 years from now. And these modern translations are useful, but they keep getting eclipsed by better modern translations. And who knows? You know, I'm on the review committee for the International Standard version, and it's got some advantages, but 10 years from now, there may be a better and a better and a better and a better, but I do my scripture memory and anchor it in something whose majesty is still unequaled and one that will be around. So that's an unusual argument. Why do we accept the Bible? Because it's authenticated by Jesus Christ, and we first have authenticated Christ because of the detailed specifications he fulfilled, and Daniel 70 weeks being the best example, and then having authenticated hem and armines, then it's authenticated by Christ in the Torah and elsewhere. That closes the loop, if you will, an integrated design of Transcendental Oregon, Oregon. 66 books penned by 40 guys over several thousand years. A design that anticipates in detail events before they happen from outside time to me. And so we have these hidden authentication codes that we've talked about, but how can you tell yourself? Jesus tells you in John 717, if any man will do his well, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God or whether I speak of myself. So having tried to at least give us a feeling for where we got our Bible, the next briefing pack you might want to explore is how to study the Bible, and how do we deal with these things in ourselves practically. We have done a book as I've indicated, which has cryptography background and it goes into the microcodes and the macrocodes and the metacodes and so forth, and how to search them for yourself if you want to go down that path. In any case, I do encourage you to do a study on how to study the Bible. There are things that are very, very helpful ways to avoid falling in the potholes alongside the road. So let's stand for a closing word of prayer. That's our hearts. Father, we thank you for your word, how precious it is. We thank you, Father, for this opportunity to gather together without fear that we can assemble without threat of death, and so many in the past have had to do. We thank you, Father, for this Bible has come to us at such a high price. We thank you for the extremes that you've gone to that we might have life in Jesus Christ. We do pray, Father, that you would increase in each of us a new hunger, a new appetite for your word, that we each might grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior, that we each might become more fruitful stewards of the opportunities ahead of us. But in all these things, Father, we, without any reservation, commit ourselves into your hands, indeed, in the name of Yeshua, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen. Amen.
